                                Volume 21 | Issue 3 | Page 24 
                              
                                NOTEBOOK

                                The self-experimenter

                                By Gordy Slack

                                The last thing Seth Roberts does each night is 
                                turn on his bedside timer, and the first thing 
                                he does each morning is switch it off. He has 
                                tracked his own sleep for more than [15] years and 
                                all those data are stored and crunchable along 
                                with the many factors he suspects influence his 
                                slumber. 

                                As his day job Roberts, an associate professor 
                                of psychology, studies animal behavior at the 
                                University of California at Berkeley. His 
                                self-study is "a hobby," he says. But he clearly 
                                thinks it's a hobby with a lot to offer the 
                                world of science. He outlined his methodologies 
                                and some of his results in a 2004 paper in 
                                Behavioral and Brain Sciences, and is currently 
                                writing a book for Penguin, The Science of One, 
                                about self-experimentation. His 2006 book The 
                                Shangri-La Diet, was also based on 
                                self-experimentation. 

                                Roberts began experimenting on himself in order 
                                to address his own bad sleep, bad skin, bad 
                                moods, and bad weight. In his sleep studies, he 
                                manipulated his diet, exercise regimen, and 
                                exposure to different kinds and amount of light. 
                                "I just came up with as many ideas as possible," 
                                he says, "and then tested them one by one." 
                                Today he is sleeping soundly, has lost 40 pounds 
                                and kept them off for years, and has skin that 
                                looks like that of someone much younger than his 
                                53 years. 

                                Some colleagues dismiss the scientific validity 
                                of Roberts's self-experimentation as 
                                uncontrolled and riddled with observer bias. 
                                Martin Voracek, a psychologist at the University 
                                of Vienna, has several concerns about Roberts's 
                                experiments. He points to the "high potential 
                                for confounding factors," which makes it hard to 
                                know what's actually causing the measured 
                                effect. Voracek adds that it's difficult to 
                                objectively measure things like one's own moods 
                                and he cautions that "there is a long history of 
                                errors through self-inspection and 
                                self-experimentation - most notably from 
                                psychoanalysis, which started with Freud's 
                                self-analysis."

                                Roberts, however, says that's beside the point. 
                                Though he believes he and others have benefited 
                                directly from his findings, it is really the 
                                hypothesis-generating aspect of 
                                self-experimentation, not the scientific 
                                conclusions, which interest him most. 
                                "Scientists don't have very good ways of coming 
                                up with new ideas, and just to get started 
                                studying a really different idea in a formal way 
                                is very expensive. With self-experimentation, 
                                the threshold is low," Roberts says.

                                To illustrate, Roberts takes out his "apparatus" 
                                for a self-study on the effects of Omega 3 fats 
                                on balance: a pipe plug about the circumference 
                                of a bottle cap, a wooden cutting board, and a 
                                stopwatch. Earlier research, reported in the BBS 
                                paper and elaborated in The Shangri-La Diet, 
                                suggested that ingesting tasteless calories in 
                                the form of oil suppressed appetite, a 
                                conclusion thousands of other dieters have now 
                                corroborated. These days, though, Roberts is 
                                studying the effects of Omega 3 fats on balance. 
                                "Balance involves lots of mental computation per 
                                second and is a good general indicator of brain 
                                function," he says. 

                                He puts the plumbing cap on the floor, places 
                                the cutting board on it, stands on the tippy 
                                thing and balances as long as he can. He 
                                practiced such balancing acts thousands of times 
                                until his abilities reached a plateau. By doing 
                                so he hoped to correct for the steep improvement 
                                that may come with early practice. He is also 
                                planning blinded studies where he drinks unknown 
                                types and concentrations of oil in the future, 
                                but for now he's just drinking Omega 3 and 
                                looking for broadly recognizable effects. 

                                These days, Roberts is getting to know one part 
                                of himself especially well: his face. For an 
                                hour each morning he gazes at his own visage in 
                                the mirror. His experiments have convinced him 
                                that the practice elevates his mood. 

                                Michel Cabanac, a professor of medicine at Laval 
                                University in Quebec and an expert on 
                                self-experimentation, says work like Roberts's 
                                is valuable and all too rare. "Too much research 
                                relies only on expensive apparatus, not on 
                                imagination. Roberts is engaging in real 
                                discovery, like Christopher Columbus," says 
                                Cabanac. 


                                comment:
                                a correction and a link
                                by Seth Roberts

                                [Comment posted 2007-03-01 23:04:40]

                                My self-experimentation about mood got started 
                                because of an accidental discovery, not because of 
                                "bad moods". 

                                The Behavioral and Brain Sciences paper about my 
                                self-experimentation is here: 

                                http://repositories.cdlib.org/postprints/117/ 


                                comment:
                                Back to the future
                                by Naina marbus

                                [Comment posted 2007-03-09 20:49:15]


                                To answer Voracek's comments that it's difficult 
                                to objectively measure things like one's own 
                                moods, Seth Roberts says that's beside the 
                                point..., that it is really the 
                                hypothesis-generating aspect of 
                                self-experimentation, not the scientific 
                                conclusions, which interest him most. To quote him 
                                further: "Scientists don't have very good ways of 
                                coming up with new ideas, and just to get started 
                                studying a really different idea in a formal way 
                                is very expensive. With self-experimentation, the 
                                threshold is low". 

                                Many of the Eastern (Hindu and Chinese) rishis, 
                                gurus and sages did just that. There are really a 
                                lot of hypothesis-generating aspects of 
                                self-experimentation involved in the ancients' 
                                studies, arising out of deep meditation and 
                                self-experimentation. The many ideas that they 
                                came up with have generally been thrown overboard 
                                as "unscientific". May be, many of those ideas 
                                should be taken up for scientific study today? 

                                Welcome back to the future!


                                comment:
                                know yourself!
                                by kishore

                                [Comment posted 2007-03-10 14:05:41]

                                I agree with Naina. Having studied vedas e vedanta 
                                for the last 18 years, I too say that this was a 
                                common practice in Vedic and near post vedic 
                                times. Welcome back to future!


                                comment:
                                What a brilliant Idea
                                by Michael Watts

                                [Comment posted 2007-03-11 23:17:38]

                                Yes some of Freud's self analysis came undone. 
                                However I agree with the other contributers that 
                                there are many thoughts and Ideas out there that 
                                are thousands of years old that need investigation. 
                                I believe that we are becoming too paranoid about 
                                the need for something to be scientifically proved 
                                and we are heading for the day when we wont do 
                                anything unless there is scientific proof that it 
                                is good for us or will benefit us in some way. The 
                                question is will the human race become a bunch of 
                                scientific couch potatoes because no one has put 
                                an idea through rigorous trials at an enormous 
                                expense. 

                                I agree that scientific review does enhance 
                                validity but is not the be all and end all of how 
                                we view the world. I say keep up the good work 
                                Gordy.

                                I must try the mirror one! 
 

                                © 1986-2007 The Scientist

       

